Move Effects

This document explains the effect id system for move processing and the most common effect ids in the Gen I to IV move list.

The way that moves are differentiated from each other and processed in poke-battle-sim is the effect id of each move. Most moves have a effect id that uniquely correspond to that move’s effect.

Since poke-battle-sim uses exclusively 1v1 battles, effects are often explained in terms of the attacker (Pokemon that used the move) and the defender (the enemy Trainer’s current Pokemon).

*Each move’s effect id can be found in its effect_id column in the move_list csv.

For instance, Trick Room has an effect id of 212, and no other move shares that effect id.

There are, however, some basic effect types that are shared by a large number of moves.

The majority of these shared effects are identified between the effect ids 0 and 17. Below are the effects that correspond to each of these shared ids:

0 - Any effect that does not affect a trainer battle’s outcome or effects that, for practical reasons, were implemented out of the process_move function.

Ex. Pay Day, Teleport, Follow Me

1 - Moves with no secondary effect (includes moves with special accuracy or priority)

Ex. Water Gun, Strength, Quick Attack

2 - Moves that have a secondary effect chance to change a single stat stage of the attacker

The chance that the secondary effect will activate is indicated by effect_chance

The amount the stat stage will change by if activated is indicated by effect_amt

The stat stage that will be affected if activated is indicated by effect_stat

The default format (found in global_settings) for effect_stat is:

0 HP (placeholder for consistency)
1 Atk
2 Def
3 Sp. Atk
4 Sp. Def
5 Speed
6 Accuracy
7 Evasion

*Note that the format of effect id 2 is also used by most effects that change a stat stage

Ex. Meteor Mash, Metal Claw, Psycho Boost

3 - Moves that have a secondary effect chance to change a single stat stage of the defender

Ex. Acid, Psychic, Bubble

4 - Moves that have a secondary effect chance to give attacker non-volatile status

The default format for the non-volatile status that will be afflicted is:

1 Burn
2 Freeze 
3 Paralysis
4 Poison
5 Sleep
6 Badly poisoned

This format is shared by other effects that inflict non-volatile statuses

*Note this effect is not present in any moves in Gen I to IV

Ex. None

5 - Moves that have a secondary effect chance to give defender non-volatile status

Ex. Poison Jab, Force Palm, Dragon Breath

6 - Moves that have a secondary effect chance to confuse defender

Ex. Signal Beam, Dynamic Punch, Water Pulse

7 - Moves that have a secondary effect chance to make defender flinch

Ex. Waterfall, Rock Slide, Hyper Fang

8 - Moves that have +1 critical hit stage modifier

Ex. Crabhammer, Slash, Aeroblast

9 - Moves that are guaranteed to make the defender flinch

Ex. Fake Out 

10 Multi-hit moves that can hit 2-5 times per turn

Ex. Fury Swipes, Barrage, Pin Missile

11 Moves that hit twice per turn

Ex. Double Kick,  Bonemerang, Double Hit

12 Moves that change the battlefield’s weather
	
*Note Weather changing moves are currently implemented individually

Ex. None

13 Status moves with primary effect to give defender non-volatile status

Ex. Toxic, Hypnosis, Spore

14 Status moves with primary effect to confuse defender

	Ex. Confuse Ray, Sweet Kiss, Teeter Dance

15 Placeholder move from legacy effect system
	
	Ex. None

16 Status moves with primary effect to change single stat stage of the attacker

	Ex. Swords Dance, Howl, Growth

17  Status moves with primary effect to change single stat stage of the defender

	Ex. Rock Polish, Fake Tears, Cotton Spore

